# Energy-Consumption-Forecasting-ML-Model
Predicting Energy Consumption Forecasting Using Regression-Based ML Models

A machine learning model that is capable of accurately forecasting energy consumption, scaling data, and displaying an easily readable visual that describes trends in energy use.

# Dataset Used
UCI's archive provided a dataset, called [ElectricityLoadDiagrams20112014](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/321/electricityloaddiagrams20112014), by Arthur Trindade. This dataset was used for the ML Model. However, this ML Model is translatable to other datasets as well.

# Motivation
Technology is advancing rapidly, increasing the need for energy-efficient appliances that are sustainable. Accurate forecasting for energy consumption is vital for the development of these innovations, as it informs a plethora of crucial design aspects, such as system optimization, infrastructure organization, and resource management. However, conventional methods of energy prediction may struggle with dynamic variables such as, but not limited to, weather, occupancy, or time-dependent use. Machine learning offers the promising potential to improve the accuracy of energy prediction models by utilizing historical data and pinpointing non-linear models. Improvements can result in reduced operating costs, optimized resource utilization, and contribute to the development of increasingly sustainable engineering practices. Moreover, the predictive model can also identify what might be causing elevated or irregular energy consumption, enabling stakeholders to make informed decisions regarding the further development of infrastructure, policies, and strategy. Analyzing seasonal or daily trends can also aid organizations in their efforts to implement targeted energy-saving measures and anticipate periods of high demand. Multiple studies also attempt to tackle this issue, such as the “Appliances Energy Prediction” machine learning model created by Luis Candanedo of the UCI Machine Learning Repository, which predicts the energy usage of common household appliances like a light fixture and accounts for the time of day, month, and year. Another similar study, one titled “Forecasting household electric appliances consumption and peak demand based on hybrid machine learning approach”, created by a team of engineers focuses more on a broader view of the topic, aiming to forecast energy consumption from smart meters.

# Objective
In this project, we hope to ultimately develop a machine learning model that is capable of accurately forecasting energy consumption. This project opens up the possibility to further this model with real or near-real-time energy consumption prediction. In order to do this, we must gather historical data related to energy consumption, such as temperature, building occupancy, and day of the week. Following this, we must preprocess/clean the data so that we can use regression techniques such as linear regression to identify trends and correlations to predict energy consumption. Using metrics such as MAE or MSE, we can assess model performance, optimize it, and hopefully explore even more regression techniques to improve accuracy and robustness.
